INSTALLATION_TUTORIAL.md, before:

# Installation tutorial

For simplicity we will consider arbitrary path $PACKAGE_PATH for the directory path where we will place all packages required for this project. This consideration is not a requirement and you can configure the paths yourself the way it is convenient for you. 

**Recommended $PACKAGE_PATH**: ~/Packages

**Later if you see $PACKAGE_PATH replace it with your path.** Or add it in your profile (~/.bashrc or ~/.zshrc, or other)

And don't forget to **create** this path first with the following command

```sh
mkdir -p $PACKAGE_PATH
```

## ROOT6

Install the [required dependencies](https://root.cern/install/dependencies/).

Then install ROOT6 via package manager (if available, [see here](https://root.cern/install/)) or pre-compiled release for your platform [here](https://root.cern/install/all_releases/).

### Pre-compiled release

If your option is the installation of pre-compiled release, after downloading place the .tar.gz file in $PACKAGE_PATH. After heading in $PACKAGE_PATH run to extract

```sh
tar -xvzf root*.tar.gz
```

Now extracted files are located at $PACKAGE_PATH/root which you should export in your profile (usually ~/.bashrc or ~/.zshrc; or other) to add search option in CMake or for python3 support. To do this as well as add easily accessible root executable add the following lines to your profile

```sh
export ROOT_PATH=$PACKAGE_PATH/root

source $ROOT_PATH/bin/thisroot.sh
```

### Installation with package manager

With package manager compiled root binaries will be located at /bin and libraries at /lib. In this case no $ROOT_PATH is not needed to be added to your profile.

### ROOT6 compilation

Alternatively, you can also compile ROOT6 yourself, however it will take quite a lot of computational power and might take a long time to compile. This step is **not recommended** if you do not have enough experience compiling packages from source.

## LHAPDF6

Download the source code from [here](https://lhapdf.hepforge.org/downloads/). Place the .tar.gz file in $PACKAGE_PATH. After heading there run to extract files

```sh
tar -xvzf LHAPDF-6*.tar.gz
```

Then head into LHAPDF-6.X.X directory (6.X.X is the version you downloaded, replace X for your version). First run to configure

```sh
mkdir build ; ./configure --prefix=`pwd`/build
```

Then compile the code with the following command

```sh
make install -j
```

Lastly add the following lines to your profile (replace 6.X.X with your LHAPDF6 version and python3.XX with the version of python you compiled LHAPDF with - look for $PACKAGE_PATH/build/lib/python* directory)

```sh
export LHAPDF6_PATH=$PACKAGE_PATH/LHAPDF-6.X.X/build/
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LHAPDF6_PATH/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
export PATH=$LHAPDF6_PATH/bin:$PATH
```

Also add the path to \_\_init.py\_\_ located somewhere in $LHAPDF6_PATH/lib/python3.XX/. This path might change with the distro, python, and LHAPDF versions. The resulting line you need to add might look like the following

```sh
export PYTHONPATH=$LHAPDF6_PATH/lib/python3.XX/site-packages:$PYTHONPATH
```

or

```sh
export PYTHONPATH=$LHAPDF6_PATH/lib/python3.XX/dist-packages/lhapdf:$PYTHONPATH
```

## PYTHIA8

Download the source code from [here](https://pythia.org/). Place the .tar.gz file in $PACKAGE_PATH. After heading there run to extract files

```sh
tar -xvzf pythia8*.tgz
```

Then head into pythia8XXX directory (8XXX is the version you downloaded, replace X for your version). First run to configure (you might need to change /bin/python-config to /bin/python3-config)

```sh
./configure --with-python-config=/bin/python-config --with-lhapdf6-config=$LHAPDF6_PATH/bin/lhapdf-config
```

Now compile the source code with the following command

```sh
make
```

After the compilation is finished successfully, add the following lines to your profile (replace X to match your pythia8 version number)

```sh
export PYTHIA8_PATH=$PACKAGE_PATH/pythia8XXX
export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHIA8_PATH/lib:$PYTHONPATH
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$PYTHIA8_PATH/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

## FASTJET3

Install [swig](https://www.swig.org/) package first (it can be installed with package manager). After, download the source code from [here](https://fastjet.fr/). Place the .tar.gz file in $PACKAGE_PATH. After heading there run to extract files

```sh
tar -xvzf fastjet-3*.tar.gz
```

Then head into fastjet-3.X.X directory (3.X.X is the version you downloaded, replace X for your version). First run to generate Makefile


```sh
mkdir build ; ./configure --prefix=`pwd`/build --enable-pyext
```

After compile the code by running

```sh
make install -j
```

Lastly add to the your profile (replace 3.X.X and 3.XX with your fastjet and python version numbers respectively)

```sh
export FASTJET3_PATH=$PACKAGE_PATH/fastjet-3.X.X/build
export PYTHONPATH=$FASTJET3_PATH/lib/python3.XX/site-packages:$PYTHONPATH
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$FASTJET3_PATH/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

## How to check the installation

In python run

```py
import lhapdf
import pythia8
import fastjet
```

If no errors occurred, the installation was successful

Commit message:

slight improvement to installation instructions

INSTALLATION_TUTORIAL.md, after:

# Installation tutorial

For simplicity we will consider arbitrary path $PACKAGE_PATH for the directory path where we will place all packages required for this project. This consideration is not a requirement and you can configure the paths yourself the way it is convenient for you. 

**Recommended $PACKAGE_PATH**: ~/Packages

**Later if you see $PACKAGE_PATH replace it with your path.** Or add it in your profile (~/.bashrc or ~/.zshrc, or other)

And don't forget to **create** this path first with the following command

```sh
mkdir -p $PACKAGE_PATH
```

## ROOT6

Install the [required dependencies](https://root.cern/install/dependencies/).

Then install ROOT6 via package manager (if available, [see here](https://root.cern/install/)) or pre-compiled release for your platform [here](https://root.cern/install/all_releases/).

### Pre-compiled release

If your option is the installation of pre-compiled release, after downloading place the .tar.gz file in $PACKAGE_PATH. After heading in $PACKAGE_PATH substitute the "name_of_file.tar.gz" for your .tar.gz file name containing ROOT6 package and run

```sh
tar -xvzf "name_of_file.tar.gz"
```

Now extracted files are located at $PACKAGE_PATH/root which you should export in your profile (usually ~/.bashrc or ~/.zshrc; or other) to add search option in CMake or for python3 support. To do this as well as add easily accessible root executable add the following lines to your profile

```sh
export ROOT_PATH=$PACKAGE_PATH/root

source $ROOT_PATH/bin/thisroot.sh
```

### Installation with package manager

With package manager compiled root binaries will be located at /bin and libraries at /lib. In this case no $ROOT_PATH is not needed to be added to your profile.

### ROOT6 compilation

Alternatively, you can also compile ROOT6 yourself, however it will take quite a lot of computational power and might take a long time to compile. This step is **not recommended** if you do not have enough experience compiling packages from source.

## LHAPDF6

LHAPDF6 can be installed via some package managers (see "System package managers" [here](https://www.lhapdf.org/install.html)). If no option is available to you follow instructions below.


Download the source code from [here](https://lhapdf.hepforge.org/downloads/). Place the downloaded .tar.gz file in $PACKAGE_PATH. After heading there substitute the "name_of_file.tar.gz" for your .tar.gz file name containing LHAPDF6 package and run


```sh
tar -xvzf "name_of_file.tar.gz"
```

Then head into LHAPDF-6.X.X directory (6.X.X is the version you downloaded, replace X for your version). First run to configure

```sh
mkdir build ; ./configure --prefix=`pwd`/build
```

Then compile the code with the following command

```sh
make install -j
```

Lastly add the following lines to your profile (replace 6.X.X with your LHAPDF6 version and python3.XX with the version of python you compiled LHAPDF with - look for $PACKAGE_PATH/build/lib/python* directory)

```sh
export LHAPDF6_PATH=$PACKAGE_PATH/LHAPDF-6.X.X/build/
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LHAPDF6_PATH/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
export PATH=$LHAPDF6_PATH/bin:$PATH
```

Also add the path to \_\_init.py\_\_ located somewhere in $LHAPDF6_PATH/lib/python3.XX/. This path might change with the distro, python, and LHAPDF versions. The resulting line you need to add might look like the following

```sh
export PYTHONPATH=$LHAPDF6_PATH/lib/python3.XX/site-packages:$PYTHONPATH
```

or

```sh
export PYTHONPATH=$LHAPDF6_PATH/lib/python3.XX/dist-packages/lhapdf:$PYTHONPATH
```

## PYTHIA8

PYTHIA8 can be installed via some package managers (such as pacman, dnf, portage, etc.). If your system package manager doesn't have pythia8 repository you can follow instructions below.


Download the source code from [here](https://pythia.org/). Place the downloaded .tgz file in $PACKAGE_PATH. After heading there substitute the "name_of_file.tgz" for your .tgz file name containing PYTHIA8 package and run

```sh
tar -xvzf "name_of_file.tgz"
```

Then head into pythia8XXX directory (8XXX is the version you downloaded, replace X for your version). First run to configure (you might need to change /bin/python-config to /bin/python3-config)

```sh
./configure --with-python-config=/bin/python-config --with-lhapdf6-config=$LHAPDF6_PATH/bin/lhapdf-config
```

Now compile the source code with the following command

```sh
make
```

After the compilation is finished successfully, add the following lines to your profile (replace X to match your pythia8 version number)

```sh
export PYTHIA8_PATH=$PACKAGE_PATH/pythia8XXX
export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHIA8_PATH/lib:$PYTHONPATH
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$PYTHIA8_PATH/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

## FASTJET3

FASTJET3 can be installed via some package managers (such as pacman, dnf, portage, etc.). If your system package manager doesn't have lhapdf repository you can follow instructions below.

Install [swig](https://www.swig.org/) package first (it can be installed with package manager). After, download the source code from [here](https://fastjet.fr/). Place the .tar.gz file in $PACKAGE_PATH. After heading there run to extract files

```sh
tar -xvzf fastjet-3*.tar.gz
```

Then head into fastjet-3.X.X directory (3.X.X is the version you downloaded, replace X for your version). First run to generate Makefile


```sh
mkdir build ; ./configure --prefix=`pwd`/build --enable-pyext
```

After compile the code by running

```sh
make install -j
```

Lastly add to the your profile (replace 3.X.X and 3.XX with your fastjet and python version numbers respectively)

```sh
export FASTJET3_PATH=$PACKAGE_PATH/fastjet-3.X.X/build
export PYTHONPATH=$FASTJET3_PATH/lib/python3.XX/site-packages:$PYTHONPATH
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$FASTJET3_PATH/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

## How to check the installation

In python run

```py
import lhapdf
import pythia8
import fastjet
```

If no errors occurred, the installation was successful
